
How to find MST using Kruskal’s algorithm?
=======================

Kruskal's algorithm to find the minimum cost spanning tree uses the greedy approach. This algorithm treats
the graph as a forest and every node it has as an individual tree. A tree connects to another only and only if, it
has the least cost among all available options and does not violate MST properties. 


1. Sort all the edges in increasing order of their weight. 
2. Pick the smallest edge. Check if it forms a cycle with the spanning tree formed so far. If the cycle is not formed, include this edge. Else, discard it. 
Repeat step#2 until there are (V-1) edges in the spanning tree.
3. Repeat step#2 until there are (V-1) edges in the spanning tree

4. Step #2 uses the Union-Find algorithm to detect cycles. 


. Kruskal’s algorithm to find the minimum cost spanning tree uses the greedy approach
. The Greedy Choice is to pick the smallest weight edge that does not cause a cycle in the MST constructed so far
. Let us understand it with an example:













The graph contains 9 vertices and 14 edges. So, the minimum spanning tree formed will be having (9 – 1) = 8 edges. 

After sorting:
Weight   Src    Dest
1         7      6
2         8      2
2         6      5
4         0      1
4         2      5
6         8      6
7         2      3
7         7      8
8         0      7
8         1      2
9         3      4
10        5      4
11        1      7
14        3      5
Now pick all edges one by one from the sorted list of edges 
Step 1: Pick edge 7-6: No cycle is formed, include it. 
 

Kruskal’s Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm

Step 2:  Pick edge 8-2: No cycle is formed, include it. 
 

Kruskal’s Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm

Step 3: Pick edge 6-5: No cycle is formed, include it. 
 

Kruskal’s Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm

Step 4: Pick edge 0-1: No cycle is formed, include it. 
 

Kruskal’s Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm

Step 5: Pick edge 2-5: No cycle is formed, include it. 
 

Kruskal’s Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm

Step 6: Pick edge 8-6: Since including this edge results in the cycle, discard it.
Step 7: Pick edge 2-3: No cycle is formed, include it. 
 

Kruskal’s Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm

Step 8: Pick edge 7-8: Since including this edge results in the cycle, discard it.
Step 9: Pick edge 0-7: No cycle is formed, include it. 
 

Kruskal’s Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm

Step 10: Pick edge 1-2: Since including this edge results in the cycle, discard it.
Step 11: Pick edge 3-4: No cycle is formed, include it. 
 

Kruskal’s Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm

Note: Since the number of edges included in the MST equals to (V – 1), so the algorithm stops here.






//////////





























To understand Kruskal's algorithm let us consider the folloǁiŶg eǆaŵple −
Figure 4.6: Kruskal's Algorithm Example
Step 1 - Remove all loops and Parallel Edges
Remove all loops and parallel edges from the given graph.
In case of parallel edges, keep the one which has the least cost associated and remove all others.
Step 2 - Arrange all edges in their increasing order of weight
The next step is to create a set of edges and weight, and arrange them in an ascending order of weightage
(cost).
Step 3 - Add the edge which has the least weightage
Downloaded from be.rgpvnotes.in
Page no: 8 Follow us on facebook to get real-time updates from RGPV
Now we start adding edges to the graph beginning from the one which has the least weight. Throughout, we
shall keep checking that the spanning properties remain intact. In case, by adding one edge, the spanning tree
property does not hold then we shall consider not to include the edge in the graph.
The least cost is 2 and edges involved are B,D and D,T. We add them. Adding them does not violate spanning
tree properties, so we continue to our next edge selection.
Next cost is 3, aŶd assoĐiated edges aƌe A,C aŶd C,D. We add theŵ agaiŶ −
Next cost in the table is 4, and we observe that adding it will create a ĐiƌĐuit iŶ the gƌaph. −
We ignore it. In the process we shall ignore/avoid all edges that create a circuit.
We observe that edges with cost 5 and 6 also create circuits. We ignore them and move on.
Downloaded from be.rgpvnotes.in
Page no: 9 Follow us on facebook to get real-time updates from RGPV
Now we are left with only one node to be added. Between the two least cost edges available 7 and 8, we shall
add the edge with cost 7.
By adding edge S, A we have included all the nodes of the graph and we now have minimum cost spanning
tree